Add a chapter about physical location (#3)
ChorusOne/network-handbook: src/chorus-one/physical-location.md

While the question “where does it run?” sounds simple enough,
it is not always clear what “it” is.

Software consists of computer programs that get executed by a chip.
In our case,
that chip is inside a server,
which is in a rack,
which is in a building,
which is part of a data center facility.
That facility has a clear physical location.
It’s located in a country, and it has an address.
We can say that the program is running in that particular location.

Blockchains are _distributed systems_.
They don’t consist of a single program running on a single machine,
they are emergent systems that arise
from many instances of a program interacting with each other.
These instances can run on different machines,
in different physical locations.
While a particular instance has a well-defined location,
we can’t really answer the question of “where” the blockchain network is,
more specifically than “everywhere where people run nodes”,
which might be as broad as “everywhere on Earth”.[^1]

A blockchain network as a whole does not have a clearly defined location then,
but at Chorus One we don’t operate the entire blockchain network,
we operate validators that are _part_ of the network.

> Don’t these validators at least have a clearly defined location?

Author: Yeah, I think the target audience of the “Network Handbook” drifted a bit. (Or the handbook is suffering from scope-creep :grimacing:). Section 2, the “Node Software Guide” is definitely aimed at readers who are building blockchains, so supposedly they know this. Section 1, “How Chorus One Operates Nodes”, I originally intended for it to be background for node software authors, but since then I found it mostly useful as a reference in RFIs. (Which is also the main motivation for writing this new chapter.) You’d think the people sending those RFIs are familiar with basic concepts, and in some of them you can see from the type of questions that they are, but for others, it’s also very clear that they have no clue.

 * **In simple cases, yes, validators have a clear location.**
   When the validator node software consists of a single program,
   we can point at the machine where that program runs,
   and say “this is where validation happens”.
   At least, at that particular point in time!
 * **In other cases, it’s more complex.**
   For many blockchains, the node software is itself a distributed system.
   Different components can run on different machines.
   Often these machines are in the same data center,
   so we can still give a fairly precise location.
   In other cases, the components may on purpose be geographically distributed.

Let’s go over a few examples to illustrate the subtleties.

[^1]: Probably except for Antarctica.

> Antarctica doesn’t have a very stable high-bandwidth Internet connection.

Reviewer: Running in the middle of the ocean might be challenging as well if we want to be that specific 😉

   We try to avoid running from data centers
   that already have a large concentration of stake.
 * **Redundancy.**
   As explained in [the reliability chapter](reliable-systems.md),
   for any node software we operate,
   we generally run it on at least two different machines,
   so that if the primary fails,
   a secondary that is standing by can take over.
   For maximum reliability,
   we want failures to be uncorrelated.
   That means that the secondary should be with a different provider,
   in a different geographic location
   — though again, there is a trade-off.
   Although we can be a bit more lenient with a secondary,
   because it’s not used as often,
   it still needs to be close to peers while avoiding centralization risk.
 * **Cost.**
   Even if multiple locations are available that satisfy the above criteria,
   not all of them may be cost-effective.
 * **Preference for Europe.**
   We spread our presence to avoid critical dependencies on a single location,
   but spreading our infrastructure brings challenges of its own.
   As we observed before,
   distributed systems tend to become slower and less stable

>    when they are spead out further.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   when they are spread out further.
```

Author: Good catch, applied.

To summarize,
there are many factors that constrain where we can run a particular piece of software.
We are able to operate servers worldwide,
but the majority of our infrastructure is in Europe.
Within Europe,
we make a trade-off between
the performance of our own node,
network centralization,
and cost-effectiveness.

## The optimal location is dynamic

When we onboard a new network,
we use the considerations listed above to pick a location.
However, these considerations are not static;
the optimal location changes over time!

 * **Newer, faster CPUs get released regularly.**
   A machine that is at the cutting edge of performance today,
   which enables us to outperform other node operators,
   may be too slow to even keep up with the network two years from now.
   We migrate our most demanding workloads several times per year
   as new hardware options become available,
   and those new options
   may be in a different data center than where the workload currently runs.
   Even when performance is not an issue,
   when hardware reaches the end of its lifespan,
   its replacement will not necessarily be in the same location.
 * **The set of peers changes, and peers move.**

>    We more our workloads around, and so do other node operators.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   We move our workloads around, and so do other node operators.
```

Author: Applied.

   [the introduction of PBS on Ethereum](#complex-example-ethereum-anno-2024),
   it’s not just the location relative to peers that matters,
   but also the location relative to the _relay_.

Because Chorus One works with multiple providers in many locations,
we have the ability to move workloads around and _test_ where they perform best.
Our infrastructure is set up to be distributed,
and it is relatively easy for us to move workloads around,
and try out new locations and machine types.

## Machine roles are dynamic

The set of machines that we use for running node software changes over time,
to optimize the location as explained in the previous sections.
These changes happen on a timescale of weeks to months.
Because we operate many different blockchain networks,
our fleet is large enough that we add and remove machines on a weekly basis,
but for a given network,
the set of locations where we run the node software is generally stable
for weeks to months.

Even though we don’t move the node software around that quickly,
we can change the _role_ that a node performs much faster.
As explained before,
we generally run multiple instances of the node software for redundancy.

> The details vary from network to network,
> but typically one instance will be actively validating
> (participating in consensus and proposing blocks).
> Other nodes download and validate a copy of the chain,
> so they are ready to take over validator duties at any time,
> but they are not participating in consensus or proposing blocks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The details vary from network to network,
but typically one instance will be actively validating
(participating in consensus and proposing blocks),
while other nodes download and validate a copy of the chain,
so they are ready to take over validator duties at any time,
but they are not participating in consensus or proposing blocks.
```

Author: Applied.

From the point of view of the network,
they are just unstaked peers.
When needed
(in the case of hardware problems,
but also to e.g. perform a software update),
we can stop validation at the current instance,
and promote a secondary instance to start validating.
This process is called _failover_.
To peers in the network,
it looks like our validator identity
suddenly jumping from one location to another.
Our validator identity may be “located” in one city at one moment,
and in a city several thousand kilomaters away the next.

The details of the failover process

> (and whether we can do this at all)

Reviewer: 0/5
```suggestion
(and whether it is possible)
```

vary from network to network,
but it generally takes seconds to minutes,
and we can perform it multiple times per day,
and even per hour if needed.
We do not just use this process to perform zero-downtime updates,
and to guarantee reliability.
We can also use this process to experiment,
and measure the impact of location on performance.

> This means that the location of our validator identity
> will generally move around between locations,
> sometimes multiple times per day.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that the location of our validator identity
can move around between locations,
sometimes multiple times per day.
```

Because signing is essential for validation,
we cannot allow signer machines to be a single point of failure,
so we have multiple signers
that are able to sign for a particular validator identity.
When multiple signers are online,
a signing request may be serviced by any of them.
While a particular signature is always created by a particular signer,
it might be that the vote for block _n_ and block _n_ + 1
are signed by different signers.
Therefore,
even over a short time period,
the question “where was the signer?”
may not have a more precise answer than “in all of these cities”.

To summarize,
our setup for validating Cosmos-based networks involves three types of machines:
**sentries**, **validators**, and **signers**.
All of them play an essential role in the validation process.
These machines can be located in different cites,
and even in different countries.

### Complex example: Ethereum anno 2024

Since Ethereum moved to Proof of Stake in September 2022,
operating a basic Ethereum validator requires multiple pieces of node software:

 * An _execution client_, such as Geth.
 * A _validator client_ for the consensus layer.
 * A _beacon node_ for the consensus layer.

>  * _PBS middleware_, such as MEV-Boost.

Reviewer 2: if we add "optional" software to the list perhaps it's worth adding remote signer such as web3signer? in our cases it's mandatory for all validator clients we run

Author: Ah yes, yet another one! And then behind web3signer is a database, which can of course be a distributed database like CockroachDB … although that is maybe one turtle too deep to mention here.

Reviewer 2: yeah i'd keep database out of this :D but web3signer is worth adding
